Editorial suggestions (#101)
ietf-wg-httpapi/ratelimit-headers: draft-ietf-httpapi-ratelimit-headers.md

--- abstract

This document defines the RateLimit-Limit, RateLimit-Remaining, RateLimit-Reset and RateLimit-Policy HTTP fields for servers to advertise their current service rate limits, thereby allowing clients to avoid being throttled.

--- note_Note_to_Readers

*RFC EDITOR: please remove this section before publication*

> Discussion of this draft takes place on the HTTP working group mailing list (httpapi@ietf.org), which is archived at <https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/httpapi/>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Discussion of this draft takes place on the HTTPAPI working group mailing list (httpapi@ietf.org), which is archived at <https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/httpapi/>.
```

For example, a quota policy of 100 quota units per minute:

~~~ example
   100;w=60
~~~

The definition of a quota policy does not imply any specific distribution of quota units within the time window. If applicable, these details can be conveyed as extension parameters.

For example, two quota policies containing further details via extension parameters:

~~~ example
   100;w=60;comment="fixed window"
   12;w=1;burst=1000;policy="leaky bucket"
~~~

To avoid clashes, implementers SHOULD prefix unregistered parameters with an `x-<vendor>` identifier, e.g. `x-acme-policy`, `x-acme-burst`. While it is useful to define a clear syntax and semantics even for custom parameters, it is important to note that user agents are not required to process quota policy information.

## Time Window {#time-window}

Rate limit policies limit the number of acceptable requests within a given time interval, known as a time window.

The time window is a non-negative Integer value expressing that interval in seconds, similar to the "delay-seconds" rule defined in {{Section 10.2.3 of HTTP}}. Subsecond precision is not supported.

## Service Limit {#service-limit}

> The service limit is the maximum number of requests that the server is willing to accept from one or more clients on a given basis (originating IP, authenticated user, geographical, ..) during a [time window](#time-window).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The service limit is associated to the maximum number of requests that the server is willing to accept from one or more clients on a given basis (originating IP, authenticated user, geographical, ..) during a [time window](#time-window).
```

The service limit is a non-negative Integer expressed in quota units.

> The service limit SHOULD match the maximum number of acceptable requests. However, the service limit MAY differ from the total number of acceptable requests when weight mechanisms, bursts, or other server policies are implemented.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The service limit SHOULD match the maximum number of acceptable requests.
However, the service limit MAY differ from the total number of acceptable requests when weight mechanisms, bursts, or other server policies are implemented.
```

that can be used to saturate its infrastructural resources.

While this specification does not mandate whether non-successful responses consume quota,
if error responses (such as 401 (Unauthorized) and 403 (Forbidden)) count against quota,
a malicious client could probe the endpoint to get traffic information of another user.

As intermediaries might retransmit requests and consume
quota units without prior knowledge of the user agent,
RateLimit fields might reveal the existence of an intermediary
to the user agent.

## Remaining quota units are not granted requests {#sec-remaining-not-granted}

RateLimit fields convey hints from the server
to the clients in order to help them avoid being throttled out.

Clients MUST NOT consider the [quota units](#service-limit) returned in RateLimit-Remaining field as a service level agreement.

In case of resource saturation, the server MAY artificially lower the returned values
or not serve the request regardless of the advertised quotas.

## Reliability of RateLimit-Reset {#sec-reset-reliability}

Consider that service limit might not be restored after the moment referenced by RateLimit-Reset field,

> and the RateLimit-Reset field value do not be considered fixed nor constant.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and the RateLimit-Reset field value may not be fixed nor constant.
```

GET /books?author=Eco    ; service-limit=4, remaining: 0, status=429
~~~

# RateLimit Field Definitions

The following RateLimit response fields are defined.

## RateLimit-Limit {#ratelimit-limit-field}

The "RateLimit-Limit" response field indicates the [service limit](#service-limit) associated with the client in the current [time window](#time-window). If the client exceeds that limit, it MAY not be served.

The field is an Item and its value is a non-negative Integer referred to as the "expiring-limit". Parameters are not allowed.

The expiring-limit MUST be set to the service limit that is closest to reaching its limit, and the associated time window MUST either be:

- inferred by the value of RateLimit-Reset field at the moment of the reset, or
- communicated out-of-band (e.g. in the documentation).

The RateLimit-Policy field (see {{ratelimit-policy-field}}), might contain information on the associated time window.

~~~ example
   RateLimit-Limit: 100
~~~

This field MUST NOT occur multiple times and can be sent in a trailer section.

## RateLimit-Policy {#ratelimit-policy-field}

> The "RateLimit-Policy" field response field indicates the quota policies currently associated with the client. Its value is informative.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The "RateLimit-Policy"  response field indicates the quota policies currently associated with the client. Its value is informative.
```

~~~

A client implementing a simple ratio between RateLimit-Remaining field and
RateLimit-Reset field could infer an average throughput of 1000 quota units per second,
while the RateLimit-Limit field conveys a quota-policy
with an average of 10 quota units per second.
If the service cannot handle such load, it should return
either a lower RateLimit-Remaining field value
or an higher RateLimit-Reset field value.
Moreover, complementing large time window quota policies with a short time window one mitigates those risks.

### Denial of Service

RateLimit fields may contain unexpected values by chance or on purpose.
For example, an excessively high RateLimit-Remaining field value may be:

- used by a malicious intermediary to trigger a Denial of Service attack
  or consume client resources boosting its requests;
- passed by a misconfigured server;

> or an high RateLimit-Reset field value could inhibit clients to contact the server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
or a high RateLimit-Reset field value could inhibit clients to contact the server.
```
